# cheatsheet

a cypher is an algorithm (which is something similar to a cookbook of instructions)

Plaintext is readable, encrypted text is not meant to be readable without first decrypting, and is sometimes called cyphertext

Symmetric cryptography:  Same key is used to encrypt and decrypt.  generally it's fast/less computationally expensive compared to asymmetric

Asymmetric cryptography: (aka Public-key cryptography) uses special "key-pairs", called the Public Key and the Private Key.  These key pairs
are generated using some special math so that knowing the public key does not help you much in discovering what the private key is. (although, minor detail,
the reverse is not always true: for *some* public key ciphers, the private key is actually used to produce the public key. in other
ciphers, they are produced together). 

For every public/private key-pair, the two keys are mathematially linked to each other and serve different purposes.  The private
key is always kept private, the public key is either published or freely shared over some channel.

One way it's used is: you generate those key-pairs, keep the private key secret and usually "publish" the public key in some way.  
you might "publish" it at the start of a new communication channel of some sort by sending it to someone or some system (web browsers do this stuff
on your behalf).  Generally the way it works is you encrypt plaintext using someone elses public key you want to send encrypted messages to, and only they
can decrypt it using their private that is linked to that public key.




Different keys are used to encrypt and decrypt, and those keys are tied together mathematically
(Generally the way this works is, first a private key is generated, then a public key for that private key is generated by running the private key



## Encryption and Hashing are two different things, but they are both frequently used together and fall under the umbrella of Cryptography

Encryption is about sharing information privately.  Frequently you'll hear the names "Alice" and "Bob" used as placeholders for two
entities that want to communicate over some medium privately.  the medium could be anything from a courier on horseback to the internet.
The problem it tries to solve is sending information over insecure mediums without that information being read by an attacker.  If your
horseback carrier gets intercepted, and the information is not encrypted, your secret message is no longer a secret.

Before key based encryption (thought to be first developed with the Vigenère cipher in the 1500s), the best way of encrypting messages
involved an agreed-upon algorithm of some sort, such as the Caesar cipher.  The problem was, if an enemy found out what the
algorithm was, then ALL messages that were encrypted using that algorithm could then be decrypted.  Introducing keys into encryption
add a layer of protection since different messages could be encrypted with different keys, and without the key, knowing the algorithm
doesn't help you to much as an attacker.  It was generally thought to be a good idea to "rotate" keys periodically and not rely on the same
one for too long, because if that key got "compromised" (i.e. discovered by a third party)

###Two major types of encryption in use today: Symmetric and Asymmetric (key) encryption.

The Vigenère cipher is considered symmetric encryption. The Enigma machine from ww2 was a mechanical implementation of a 
advanced (at the time) symmetric encryption algorithm.  In modern times we have newer, more advanced, symmetric encryption
algorithms like AES, DES (and its successor 3DES), Blowfish, Twofish, RC4, etc.  AES is probably the mosed commonly used as it is the
Advanced Encryption Standard.  The actual original name of the algorithm is "Rijndael" (based on it's creators names), but since it was adopted
for the standard it's more commonly just called AES.  AES was established by NIST around 2001 and the Rijndael algorithm was picked
from several submissions that were vying to become part of the standard.

All symmetric algorithms use the same key to encrypt and decrypt with.

as well as other algorithms such as  AES (aka Rijndael). since the same key is used to encrypt and decrypt, so both the
sender and the intended recipient need to know the key for a particular message.    

Symmetric encryption: This is everything from the ancient “Vigenère cipher” all the way up to AES (aka Rijndael) and beyond. You have a key to encrypt with,
and if someone has that same key they can decrypt what you sent. Generally you want that key to be randomly generated by an entity and kept secret, and
shared securely somehow between 

Fast encryption/decryption: you have one key that can be used to encrypt AND 
decrypt text or a data stream. It's fast and efficient, but you have to make sure you are delivering the key and storing it securely where it's needed.  
JEC: The key has to be known by both sides of the encryption channel.  It’s literally a “shared key”.   
But that’s has an inherent problem of: how do you share the key with the intended recipient without someone else discovering your key.  Imagine two generals in a war on opposite sides of a conflict trying to establish an encrypted channel so they can communicate plans.  How do they get that key to the other general?

JEC: This was all we had up until the 1970’s.  Yes, until the 1970’s.  Like literally, before the 70’s that was the only form of encryption that was understood to work, it didn’t matter what the algorithm was, the most difficult thing was getting the key to the other side without it getting compromised.  Because the key had to be kept secret and had to be known by both entities on each side of the encryption/decryption channel, keeping the key secret was a REAL problem.   You’d have to use things like “trusted carriers” to deliver a key in a briefcase that was handcuffed to his wrist to the party you were trying to communicate with, and hope the carriers weren’t compromised.  There was literally no other way, before the advancements in the 70’s.Sharing a key is an inherent problem.

So some clever lads figured out an alternative in the 70’s, and it was kicked off by Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman.   (“Diffie-Hellman”, they were the first, others spring-boarded off their work but they kind of laid the first mathematical foundation)


Asymmetric key/encryption: 
you have two keys, one private and one public. You keep the private secret and put the public one on display for people to use.   



Receiving encrypted documents: anyone can use your public key to encrypt something that you will then be able to decrypt using your private key. 

Signing: you use the private key to create a digital signature of a document you want to circulate. People can use the public key to verify that the document was authored and signed by the owner of the matching private key. 


Sending encrypted documents: same as above, but you use someone else's public key. 



(JEC: the problem with symmetric crypto is: how do two entities share a key without revealing the key to a third party?  Answer: You need asymmetric encryption to exchange those keys…or quibbling a bit, a “key-exchange algorithm”,  but as far as I know those are all based on some form of asymmetric encryption) 

TLS (JEC:think https, what your browser uses to communicate with most websites, like when you browse amazon or check your gmail) includes both asymmetric and symmetric, the public/private part is used to exchange a secret over an insecure channel, and then once the two parties have a shared symmetric key that is used to encrypt/decrypt the data stream. 
